Blood demand has been increasing all over the world. It is a perishable commodity with limited life. It is made up of various components. These components have very small shelf life, starting from 48hrs to months. Its only source is the healthy human being. The demand for it arises from the injured or ailing human being. The blood supplied by one person cannot be used randomly for another person, unless the group matches with each. The blood bank is a valuable resource for the health and wealth of human beings. It is in this organization that stock of blood is maintained in healthy conditions to meet the demands of common people. 

Currently there is a deficit of blood components in India. Searching for donors and getting the blood on time is becoming a bigger problem day by day. Many times blood donation camps organised by multiple social and corporate organisations collect excess quantities of blood. By the very nature of this perishable commodity, the amount of components which are discarded because of expiry is increasing. And another problem is that the donor is ineligible to donate for the next 90 days.

If the demand - supply - storage parameters are specifically mapped, the shortfall of blood components can substantially come down. All the issues present many opportunities which IT can solve. So, there is a need for a data science tool which will help Organisers, Blood Banks, Health departments as well as the hospital to forecast the blood components requirements in short term and accordingly plan the blood donation drives which will lead to proper utilization of blood components, demand fulfillment of patients and reducing the deficit of supply and wastage of blood components.

A blood bank is an organization that collects, processes, stores, and transfuses blood. In most health agencies the blood bank is located in the pathology laboratory. It is operated by medical technologists under the direction of a pathologist. The blood cells are mainly red blood cells, white blood cells (WBCs) and platelets. These components have different lifetimes when considered separately. In order to utilize the donated blood to maximum extent, generally the whole blood is divided into platelets and RBCs by a process called centrifuging the blood and stored separately. By the very nature of this perishable commodity usually, blood banks replenish their blood supplies through blood donation camps, voluntary donors, paid procurement etc. Blood donation is a simple four-step process.

The average adult has about 10 units of blood in his body. Roughly 1 unit is given during a donation. Donating Blood weakens the donor’s body for sometime so there is a wait period of 2 to 3 months between consecutive Donations.
